Create rule S7034: "contains" should be used to test whether a substring is part of a string (CPP-4996) (#4096)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S7034/cfamily/rule.adoc

> == Why is this an issue?

Reviewer: I do not plan to find code like
```cpp
auto index = s.find(xxx);
if (index == -1) { ...}
// index not used for something else
```
i.e., I only plan to cover direct comparisons of the result.

Let me know if the description needs to be improved regarding this.

There are multiple ways and useful functions to determine whether a substring or a character is part of another string.
Historically, the standard {cpp} functions provide this feature through proxies that do not directly reflect the intent of the code:

* The `find` functions on `std::string` and `std::string_view` return an index into the searched string.
The substring or character is not present when the index is equal to `npos` (often spelled `-1`).

* The `std::strstr` and `std::strchr` functions return a pointer into the searched string.
When they return `nullptr`, the substring or character is not present.

> While these functions work, they complexify the code because they do not work at the right abstraction level.

Reviewer 2: I think that I suggested that because I think there are two different reasons that explain why these functions are a bad choice, but the current wording collapses them:
* The naming is bad
* Because more information is returned, you need extra code to focus on the point of interest

I'm fine with you not liking my wording, but I'd still like something that mention both rationales.

> While these functions work, they complexify the code because they do not work at the right abstraction level.

Reviewer: Thanks for explaining your suggestion. I think that makes sense. I tried something in 60ac560356. Let me know if it's better or can be further improved.

> Thankfully, {cpp}23 introduces `contains` on `std::string` and `std::string_view` to simplify this task.

Reviewer: I feel this would be a distraction and, to be nitpicky, not exactly true: `std::list`, `std::array`, `std::vector`, and others don't have such functions, for example. I feel the link to the related rule is enough for interested readers.

> Thankfully, {cpp}23 introduces `contains` on `std::string` and `std::string_view` to simplify this task.

Reviewer 2: I think I anthropomorphize the standard...

> This rule raises an issue when the use of `contains` could improve the code's readability and maintainability.

Reviewer 2: Maybe to cover your question about not detecting complex patterns:
```suggestion
This rule raises an issue when it detects code that could be improved with the use of `contains`.
```

  }
}
----

In these examples, `haystack` could also be a `std::string_view`, and `needle` could be a single character, a C-string, or anything convertible to `std::string_view` such as a `std::string`.

=== Replacing `strstr` and `strchr` with `contains`

The solution is marginally more complex with the C-inherited functions `strstr` and `strchr` because they take null-terminated C-string as parameters.

This means you may have to construct a `std::string_view` first if you don't already have a `std::string` or `std::string_view`.
Thankfully, `std::string_view` is a lightweight object that can be created inline without impacting performance.

The following examples illustrate how to replace `strstr` but the same process can be applied to `strchr`.

// We do not show examples with strchr to avoid entering the confusing realm of characters being represented as `int` but interpreted as `char`.

// Nor do we explain that strchr(haystack, '\0') cannot be expressed as string_view{haystack}.contains('\0') because, by construction, the former is always true and the latter is always false.
// We do not expect people to write such code anyway.

==== Noncompliant code example

> [source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
> ----
> void example(const char* haystack, const char* needle) {
>   if (std::strstr(haystack, needle) == nullptr) { // Noncompliant
>     // The needle was not found.
>   }
> }
> ----
> 
> ==== Compliant solution
> 
> [source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
> ----
> void example(const char* haystack, const char* needle) {
>   if (!std::string_view{haystack}.contains(needle)) {
>     // The needle was not found.
>   }
> }

Reviewer 2: I would reverse the example. I'm not sure why...
```suggestion
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void example(const char* haystack, const char* needle) {
  if (std::strstr(haystack, needle) != nullptr) { // Noncompliant
    // The needle was found.
  }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
void example(const char* haystack, const char* needle) {
  if (std::string_view{haystack}.contains(needle)) {
    // The needle was found.
  }
}
```

Reviewer: The idea was to have a negation in one of the two examples in "How to fix it".

Do you feel it's more readable to have

* `haystack.find(needle) == std::string::npos` --> `!haystack.contains(needle)`
* `std::strstr(haystack, needle) != nullptr` --> `std::string_view{haystack}.contains(needle)`

?

Reviewer 2: Maybe the issue I have is that I think `!=` is just as readable as `==`, while adding an extra `!` at the start of an expression is not as visible... Maybe the diff highlighting (not visible during my review) would alleviate my concern...

Reviewer: > Maybe the issue I have is that I think `!=` is just as readable as `==`, while adding an extra `!` at the start of an expression is not as visible...

I agree with that. And, if we want one example to use the negative version, `!haystack.contains(needle)` is the more readable of the two.

I'll make this change; we can rediscuss if you still see some improvements to be made.

> Maybe the diff highlighting (not visible during my review) would alleviate my concern...

Partially, I'm afraid: we still do not have word-level diff.

Reviewer: Done in 287aaf2aac.

----

While the previous solution works and only requires modifying a single line of code, replacing the C-strings with `std::string_view` objects throughout your program would be better

== Resources

=== Documentation

* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/basic_string_view/contains[`std::string_view::contains`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/basic_string/contains[`std::string::contains`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/basic_string/find[`std::string::find`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/byte/strstr[`std::strstr`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/byte/strchr[`std::strchr`]

> 

Reviewer: I could (bidirectionally) link to [S6171](https://sonarsource.github.io/rspec/#/rspec/S6171) "contains" should be used to check if a key exists in a container

WDYT?

Reviewer: * 0874569 in #4097
* fac9138

> //=== Articles & blog posts
> //=== Conference presentations
> //=== Standards
> //=== External coding guidelines
> //=== Benchmarks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

== Why is this an issue?

There are multiple ways and useful functions to determine whether a substring or a character is part of another string.
Historically, the standard {cpp} functions provide this feature through proxies that do not directly reflect the intent of the code:

* The `find` functions on `std::string` and `std::string_view` return an index into the searched string.
The substring or character is not present when the index is equal to `npos` (often spelled `-1`).

* The `std::strstr` and `std::strchr` functions (inherited from C) return a pointer into the searched string.
When they return `nullptr`, the substring or character is not present.

While these functions work, they complexify the code:

1. They do not work at the right abstraction level.
Instead of just returning a `bool` indicating whether the substring is present, they return a proxy from which the information can be decoded.

> This requires some boilerplate code that hides the indent of the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This requires some boilerplate code that clouds the indent of the code.
```

2. Their names do not reflect the performed task.
The names of the C functions are arguably hard to read and obscure.
They only make sense after reading their documentation.
Furthermore, `find` also has a name unrelated to the current task.

Thankfully, {cpp}23 introduces `contains` on `std::string` and `std::string_view` to simplify this task.

This rule raises an issue when it detects code that could be improved with the use of `contains`.

== How to fix it

> === Replacing `find` with `contains`

Reviewer: While implementing the rule and writing tests, we need to either:

1. explain how to use `contains` with string_view's substr when the `find` is called with a starting position.
2. decide to mark this as an exception and not raise.

@loic-joly-sonarsource do you have a preference for one of these alternatives?

Reviewer: 3. we can have a follow-up ticket and move a bit faster on this one.

Reviewer: * for `std::string`, do not raise. Wait for a proper `view` method that returns the correct view type.
* for `std::string_view`, raise.
* add rspec example how to fix.

Reviewer: a9750b53c3

Reviewer: @loic-joly-sonarsource can you review this last commit? Thanks

Reviewer 2: @marco-antognini-sonarsource Sorry, I had reviewed it, but did not publish the review.

This allows you, for example, to look for some content in a string while ignoring some prefixes.
However, this is essentially putting two distinct actions into one and clouds the intent.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void example(std::string_view haystack,
             std::size_t skipPrefix,
             std::string_view needle) {
  if (haystack.find(needle, skipPrefix) == std::string::npos) { // Noncompliant
    // The needle was not found after the prefix.
  }
}
----

==== Compliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
void example(std::string_view haystack,
             std::size_t skipPrefix,
             std::string_view needle) {
  if (haystack.substr(skipPrefix).contains(needle)) {
    // The needle was not found after the prefix.
  }
}
----

Because `std::string_view` is a lightweight class, the compliant solution remains efficient.
Furthermore, `substr` can also take a second parameter, allowing the operation to check for a substring while also ignoring a postfix.

=== Replacing `strstr` and `strchr` with `contains`

> The solution is marginally more complex with the C-inherited functions `strstr` and `strchr` because they take null-terminated C-string as parameters.

Reviewer: Improved in e8f675f948

// For std::string, we are waiting for https://wg21.link/p3044 sub-string_view from string.

When calling `find` on a `std::string_view`, you can provide a second parameter that allows skipping some characters.
This allows you, for example, to look for some content in a string while ignoring some prefixes.
However, this is essentially putting two distinct actions into one and clouds the intent.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void example(std::string_view haystack,
             std::size_t skipPrefix,
             std::string_view needle) {
  if (haystack.find(needle, skipPrefix) == std::string::npos) { // Noncompliant
    // The needle was not found after the prefix.
  }
}
----

==== Compliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
void example(std::string_view haystack,
             std::size_t skipPrefix,
             std::string_view needle) {
  if (haystack.substr(skipPrefix).contains(needle)) {
    // The needle was not found after the prefix.
  }
}
----

Because `std::string_view` is a lightweight class, the compliant solution remains efficient.

> Furthermore, `substr` can also take a second parameter, allowing the operation to check for a substring while also ignoring a postfix.

Reviewer: Improved in e8f675f948

> 

Reviewer: Improved in e8f675f948
